@node Environments
@chapter Environments
@anchor{environments}
Scheme (and thus GoLisp) is lexically scoped. This is implemented by the
creation of a lexical environment (aka symbol table) for each lexical
scope:

@itemize
@item
function/lambda/macro invocations, which holds parameters and any local
definitions

@item
@code{let} structures, which hold the @code{let} bindings

@item
@code{do} structures, which hold the @code{do} bindings

@end itemize

Functions and lambdas capture a reference to the environment in which
they were defined, so they always have access to it's bindings (that's a
closure, btw).

Each environment has a connection to it's containing environment, and
can override/hide bindings in outer scopes. When a symbol is evaluated,
the most local environment is searched first. If a binding for the
system isn't found there, the containing environment is searched. This
continues until a binding for the sybol is found or we go all the way to
the global environment and still can't find a binding.

Section 3.2 of [1] does a great job of explaining environments in
Scheme, which is the basis for environments in GoLisp.

In Scheme, some environments are more important than others, mainly as
they tend to be larger, long lived, and serve as the root of many other
environments as a program runs. These are known as @emph{top level
environments}. Specifially, these are the global environment (the only
environment that is contained by nothing), and any environments directly
below it in the environment tree. The REPL runs in one such environment,
which effectively sandboxes it, protecting the bindings in the global
environment from corruption.

@node environment? object
@subsection (environment? @emph{object})
@anchor{environment-object}
Returns @code{@hashchar{}t} if @emph{object} is an environment; otherwise returns
@code{@hashchar{}f}.

@node environment-has-parent? environment
@subsection (environment-has-parent? @emph{environment})
@anchor{environment-has-parent-environment}
Returns @code{@hashchar{}t} if @emph{environment} has a parent environment;
otherwise returns @code{@hashchar{}f}.

@node environment-parent environment
@subsection (environment-parent @emph{environment})
@anchor{environment-parent-environment}
Returns the parent environment of @emph{environment}. It is an error if
@emph{environment} has no parent.

@node environment-bound-names environment
@subsection (environment-bound-names @emph{environment})
@anchor{environment-bound-names-environment}
Returns a newly allocated list of the names (symbols) that are bound by
@emph{environment}. This does not include the names that are bound by
the parent environment of @emph{environment}. It does include names that
are unassigned or keywords in @emph{environment}.

@node environment-macro-names environment
@subsection (environment-macro-names @emph{environment})
@anchor{environment-macro-names}
Returns a newly allocated list of the names (symbols) that are bound to
syntactic keywords in @emph{environment}.

@node environment-bindings environment
@subsection (environment-bindings @emph{environment})
@anchor{environment-bindings}
Returns a newly allocated list of the bindings of @emph{environment};
does not include the bindings of the parent environment. Each element of
this list takes one of two forms: @code{(symbol)} indicates that
@emph{symbol} is bound but unassigned, while @code{(symbol object)}
indicates that @emph{symbol} is bound, and its value is @code{object}.

@node environment-reference-type environment symbol
@subsection (environment-reference-type @emph{environment}
@emph{symbol})
@anchor{environment-reference-type}
Returns a symbol describing the reference type of @emph{symbol} in
@emph{environment} or one of its ancestor environments. The result is
one of the following:

@itemize
@item
@code{normal} means @emph{symbol} is a variable binding with a normal
value.

@item
@code{unassigned} means @emph{symbol} is a variable binding with no
value.

@item
@code{macro} means @emph{symbol} is a keyword binding.

@item
@code{unbound} means @emph{symbol} has no associated binding.

@end itemize

@node environment-bound? environment symbol
@subsection (environment-bound? @emph{environment} @emph{symbol})
@anchor{environment-boundp}
Returns @code{@hashchar{}t} if @emph{symbol} is bound in @emph{environment} or one
of its ancestor environments; otherwise returns @code{@hashchar{}f}. This is
equivalent to

@verbatim
(not (eq? ’unbound
          (environment-reference-type environment symbol)))
@end verbatim

@node environment-assigned? environment symbol
@subsection (environment-assigned? @emph{environment} @emph{symbol})
@anchor{environment-assignedp}
Returns @code{@hashchar{}t} if @emph{symbol} is bound in @emph{environment} or one
of its ancestor environments, and has a normal value. Returns @code{@hashchar{}f}
if it is bound but unassigned. Signals an error if it is unbound or is
bound to a keyword.

@node environment-lookup environment symbol
@subsection (environment-lookup @emph{environment} @emph{symbol})
@anchor{environment-lookup}
@emph{symbol} must be bound to a normal value in @emph{environment} or
one of its ancestor environments. Returns the value to which it is
bound. Signals an error if unbound, unassigned, or a keyword.

@node environment-lookup-macro environment symbol
@subsection (environment-lookup-macro @emph{environment} @emph{symbol})
@anchor{environment-lookup-macrop}
If @emph{symbol} is a keyword binding in @emph{environment} or one of
its ancestor environments, returns the value of the binding. Otherwise,
returns @code{@hashchar{}f}. Does not signal any errors other than argument-type
errors.

@node environment-assignable? environment symbol
@subsection (environment-assignable? @emph{environment} @emph{symbol})
@anchor{environment-assignablep}
@emph{symbol} must be bound in @emph{environment} or one of its ancestor
environments. Returns @code{@hashchar{}t} if the binding may be modified by side
effect.

@node environment-assign! environment symbol value
@subsection (environment-assign! @emph{environment} @emph{symbol}
@emph{value})
@anchor{environment-assign}
@emph{symbol} must be bound in @emph{environment} or one of its ancestor
environments, and must be assignable. Modifies the binding to have
@emph{value} as its value, and returns an unspecified result.

@node environment-definable? environment symbol
@subsection (environment-definable? @emph{environment} @emph{symbol})
@anchor{environment-definablep}
Returns @code{@hashchar{}t} if @emph{symbol} is definable in @emph{environment},
and @code{@hashchar{}f} otherwise.

@node environment-define environment symbol value
@subsection (environment-define @emph{environment} @emph{symbol}
@emph{value})
@anchor{environment-define}
Defines @emph{symbol} to be bound to object in @emph{environment}, and
returns an unspecified value. Signals an error if @emph{symbol} isn't
definable in @emph{environment}.

@node eval sexpr environment
@subsection (eval @emph{sexpr} @emph{environment})
@anchor{eval-with-environment}
Evaluates @emph{sexpr} in @emph{environment}. You rarely need eval in
ordinary programs; it is useful mostly for evaluating expressions that
have been created ``on the fly'' by a program.

@node system-global-environment
@subsection (system-global-environment)
The function @code{system-global-environment} is returns the
distinguished environment that's the highest level ancestor of all other
environments. It is the parent environment of all other top-level
environments. Primitives, system procedures, and most syntactic keywords
are bound in this environment.

@node the-environment
@subsection (the-environment)
Returns the current environment. This form may only be evaluated in a
top-level environment. An error is signalled if it appears elsewhere.

@node procedure-environment procedure
@subsection (procedure-environment @emph{procedure})
@anchor{procedure-environment}
Returns the closing environment of @emph{procedure}. Signals an error if
@emph{procedure} is a primitive procedure.

@node make-top-level-environment [names [values]]
@subsection (make-top-level-environment [@emph{names} [@emph{values}]])
@anchor{make-top-level-environment}
Returns a newly allocated top-level environment.
extend-top-level-environment creates an environment that has parent
environment, make-top-level-environment creates an environment that has
parent system-global-environment, and make- root-top-level-environment
creates an environment that has no parent.

The optional arguments @emph{names} and @emph{values} are used to
specify initial bindings in the new environment. If specified,
@emph{names} must be a list of symbols, and @emph{values} must be a list
of objects. If only @emph{names} is specified, each name in @emph{names}
will be bound in the environment, but unassigned. If @emph{names} and
@emph{values} are both specified, they must be the same length, and each
name in @emph{names} will be bound to the corresponding value in
@emph{values}. If neither @emph{names} nor @emph{values} is specified,
the environment will have no initial bindings.

Environments in GoLisp differ slightly from standard Scheme in that they
have a name attached. For the various forms of @code{let} and @code{do}
this is simply @code{"let"} and @code{"do"}, respectively. Not of much
use, but then these are just a byproduct of having lexical scopes.
What's more useful is the higher level environments. This brings us to
the real reason for adding environment support: game integration
sandboxes. When we were writing the game integration functionallity for
Engine3, we wanted each game's event handling to live in a separate
sandbox. This is implemented buy creating a new top level environment
under the global environment. The problem here is that it's off in it's
own world, separate from the repl. By naming environments (in this case
by the name of the game), we can add a function to return an environment
given it's name. That allows us to peek inside the sandbox from the
repl, examining and manipulating the bindings there. And so we added a
function to let us do that:

@node find-top-level-environment name
@subsection (find-top-level-environment @emph{name})
@anchor{find-top-level-environment-name}
Returns the top level environment with the given name.


@c Local Variables:
@c mode: texinfo
@c End:
