@node Time and Date
@chapter Time and Date
@anchor{time-and-date}
All of these date and time function use the local time.

@node time-now
@subsection (time-now)
Return the current local time as a list of the form
@code{(hour minute second)}.

@verbatim
(time-now) ==> (19 53 50)
@end verbatim

@node seconds
@subsection (seconds)
Returns the number of seconds since midnight on the current day.

@verbatim
(seconds) ==> 71644
@end verbatim

@node millis
@subsection (millis)
Returns the number of milliseconds since midnight on the current day.

@verbatim
(millis) ==> 71646935
@end verbatim

@node date-today
@subsection (date-today)
Return today's date as a list of the form @code{(year month day)}.

@verbatim
(date-today) ==> (2016 12 19)
@end verbatim

@node date-in-days days
@subsection (date-in-days @emph{days})
@anchor{date-in-days}
Return the date in @emph{days} days from today as a list of the form
@code{(year month day)}.

@verbatim
(date-in-days 3) ==> (2016 12 22)
@end verbatim

@node day-of-week
@subsection (day-of-week)
Returns a symbol representing the current day of the week.

@verbatim
(day-of-week) ==> monday
@end verbatim

@node Timers
@chapter Timers
@anchor{timers}

@node timer millis func
@subsection (timer @emph{millis} @emph{func})
@anchor{timer}
Schedules @emph{func} (a function of zero arguments) to be evaluated
after @emph{millis} milliseconds. Returns a timer object.

@node stop-timer timer
@subsection (stop-timer @emph{timer})
@anchor{stop-timer}
Stop and cancel the timer @emph{timer}.

@node ticker millis func
@subsection (ticker @emph{millis} @emph{func})
@anchor{ticker}
Schedules @emph{func} (a function of zero arguments) to be evaluated
after @emph{millis} milliseconds and every @emph{millis} milliseconds
thereafter until stopped. Returns a ticker object.

@node stop-ticker ticker
@subsection (stop-ticker @emph{ticker})
@anchor{stop-ticker}
Stop and cancel the ticker @emph{ticker}.


@c Local Variables:
@c mode: texinfo
@c End:
